when you do it that backwards and we get
this a lot
a lot people reach out like we want to
put this tool in to solve our problems
like the tool is not going to solve your
problems
i think you very very clarifying and
communicating across your team so
everybody agrees what that problem is is
probably a better way to start solving
the problem is to clarify what the
problem is
you know i always do the exercise of the
discovery calls talk to the key
stakeholders what are your biggest
problems can we rank them and then can
we go meet as a team
and let's not worry about who said what
but let's prioritize this list of
problems we're able to curate from
everybody
and then and then prioritize it just so
we all agree what's number one problem
number two number three
and then let's let's start looking at
solutions based on how well it's gonna
solve the problem
welcome to 20 minute leaders just sit
back relax and learn from the leaders of
today it's a journey each one is
different unique inspiring let's get
started
[Music]
20 minute leaders is a proud supporter
of make-a-wish israel and tech to peace
and is in proud collaboration with
secret court ventures j ventures
riverside fm
fusion vc
birthright excel
j impact leap
google for startups and hippo and in
media partnership with ctec
this episode is all about m a's
meet kisan patel the founder and ceo of
m a science with a passion to drive the
m a industry forward
he was an m advisor for 10 years in
which he sold larger companies such as
commercial banks and hotel chains and in
2012 he noticed teams lacked efficient
technology to manage deals and create a
deal room an m a life cycle management
platform
in 2016 he started the m a science
podcast devoting his time to creating a
platform where all the best
practitioners could share their best
practices and lessons learned from real
life deals nissan then created the m a
science academy in 2020 to offer
step-by-step training to those looking
to master m a featuring courses created
by top level practitioners
through developing technology
educational content and industry
training keyson aims to bring better
practices to an industry with growing
market pressures transaction values and
competition
[Music]
kisan patel welcome to 20 minute leaders
thank you so much for joining me today
how are you i'm doing well thanks for
asking michael
i'm excited to have you here um
with
with it looking at deals right i mean
we're looking at m a's and it's a very
complicated market that we're in it's
constantly changing
and and from an entrepreneur's
perspective it can be a little bit weird
to think through some of these
strategies and that on one hand we're
building products right and we're being
measured on our technology our product
on our ability to
to have meaningful impact on consumer
behavior but then there's this whole
other part of our work which is at the
end m a and
closing deals
which are not always one and the same
with developing the product and so i'm
looking forward to hearing your insights
on this thank you for joining me
hey my pleasure thank you
how did you get started with deals m a
strategy how did that become your world
that's a good question i i think for a
little kid i was always interested in
big things big numbers my dad would
complain about it he's like why is this
kid always talking about millions and
billions and uh you know but i uh
i got into real estate
early
in residential real estate and i wasn't
good at it
and somehow i found my way into this
boutique m a advisory practice that was
just starting up so i was like higher
number three
and i
got my feet grounded right there because
you had to do everything like it was so
early in building this i was heavily
involved in the business development
part of it
which was the fun part to go out to go
interact with clients go hunt deals and
then when i found it we didn't have a
team of analysts so then you had to do
all the back and work once you got a
deal in progress so i gotta learn all
those things i did that for a year with
this firm wasn't completely bought in on
their strategy and long-term vision so i
left to start my own practice and built
that up for close to a decade
did mostly hotel
hospitality transactions
and small financial institutions
wow and so
you you come into this industry and you
you realize that there's ways to
innovate in it right and to look at the
whole
the whole flow and the life cycle of an
m a
what sort of led to your conviction that
that something here can be changed or
improved upon that you can dedicate your
career to this right now like it starts
with the typical founder experience in
the industry which gets you familiar
with a lot of the pain points challenges
but as i kept
expanding the view and looking at other
types of deals bigger transactions
i just identified a massive
amount of inefficiencies
which had correlated with a massive
amount of opportunity to create value
and we wanted to start by bringing in a
project management tool into the space
because i took a lot of inspiration from
the software industry and how these
engineers were using these cool project
management tools to drive their
efficiency and thought why not for mna
why don't we bring that in and we
started with just that focusing on the
due diligence problem bringing in a
project management tool so that there's
a much more efficient workflow instead
of what companies are doing in excel
which is highly inefficient and then it
just i think the thing the big lesson
learned the hard way
was creating a good feedback loop with
your cohorts of prospective customers
you're looking to serve
and being able to get feedback very very
early
in
early as identifying the problem you're
trying to solve and make sure that you
understand that problem that the
problem's worth solving
and once we started building that
feedback loop and continued it as a
cycle as we started prototyping
solutions and continue getting feedback
we found it much more effective to
create solutions for the market which
allowed us to keep that same
cycle
and repeat it as we identify other
problems so we went from diligence
management to after the deal's done you
got to integrate this company
and for us once we solved that problem
it even built a better value proposition
by solving the integration problem
because now we we found that there's
underpinning problem the continuity
between diligence integration a lot of
the knowledge doesn't get handed off so
we're able to solve for that and then
you just continue
down the line talking to practitioners
we found that the industry as a whole
was lacking best practices and real
evidence in the techniques that they're
applying to m a and that's what led us
to starting a podcast to leverage that
as a platform to enable practitioners to
be able to share the lessons learned so
through a series of these interviews
we've been able to publish books and
frameworks and now we kind of enter
working with a client hand in hand or
what are the best practices we can
introduce what are the tools that we can
introduce to help standardize those
practices and really look at their life
cycle and drive that efficiency
so if you're looking at
the way deals are made and and if we're
looking at some you know common pitfalls
that may not be so trivial
to somebody who who didn't experience
them firsthand
yeah what are some of those
misalignments you you mentioned one
which was this handing off of the of the
of the information and knowledge
between the
between the diligence and the
integration post post acquisition
but are there other other non-trivial
pitfalls that that m a's generally tend
to converge to that that you're helping
avoid through deal room
the deal room product i would say
there's a lot around information
management but the the bigger theme is
is the people having a people-focused m
a approach
when we look at traditional m a
we think of the the
you know the old rj nabisco these old
school transactions that were just
heavily financially driven
and that's all it was was just all about
the financial model to build a case to
do the deal but
companies now realize it's all about how
well teams are aligned to be able to
execute
on that plan to be able to deliver the
value
so now we're seeing a greater emphasis
and changes around how do you create
that alignment and engagement throughout
the process
so that these teams understand clearly
where the goals are they're motivated
and they're out executing to be able to
deliver those results
with that so yeah a couple things that
happened one is what's the end state
look like right there's this
we always have a vision of what we want
to achieve and how we're going to create
value and that's how we build our
synergy models to come up with that that
case for doing the deal
but then when we look at what the actual
end state looks like of that business
and how it serves the customers because
we are going from two different
businesses
that exist
to create value for their customers with
their own unique ways of doing it and
how's that going to come together in one
so we sort of have a consolidated
customer journey
i'm bringing that vision all the way to
the very front end of the process and
getting executives aligned around it so
they can get a sense of what's this go
to market gonna look like
uh what are those things that we're
gonna need to change to achieve that go
to market
especially the executive for the company
requiring
a lot of times they get fixated on the
check and how big of a check they're
gonna get and how long it's gonna take
to close but what's your role in
responsibility after we close how are
you gonna help us make sure we achieve
our goals and get the value on this
business
um i'd say that's that's a big thing the
end state up front
and then the other is around the culture
side right because we've hear about
these deals blow up because cultures
didn't mix and match there's always the
daimler chrysler deal that's a prime
example
uh you know hey we're gonna give you
autonomy no we're not going to give you
autonomy
not good you know you got the startup
stuff right you got a traditional
company very top-down management startup
very bottoms-up management they don't
just integrate fully together nicely so
how do we
understand the cultures and starts off
by just values right every company's got
value somewhere
when you have a conversation around it
and actually expand what those values
mean you get an understanding of culture
leadership approaches those things help
you it helps you understand maybe
there's some big red flags and these are
gonna we shouldn't come together as an
organization
or maybe we better understand how we're
gonna come together as an organization
maybe because there's some
differences we need to
do very minimal integration versus
there's a lot of complementary styles in
culture then we could integrate more
fully so those are like some of these
key considerations when buying a company
that you would
really we were starting to see change
right definitely
more about the people getting alignment
up front uh and then also just
throughout that process how do you keep
a level of transparency to keep people
in the know
a lot of times you hear that cliche
thing where the the vision gets lost the
the why are we doing this deal and
people are turns into check boxing
activity and things get messed up
you know if you can keep the goals there
and create that autonomy transparency
then teams can problem solve as they
come across some of these things when
they go through that life cycle
sure
so
communication people first
integration expectations it sounds like
this is a central theme to
these m a processes which non-trivially
they they put it they they they don't
necessarily
align with you know the
is this the right business fit is this
the right product so we're assuming that
given those stand in place
now we're approaching a new set of
challenges which which it seems like
weren't in too much consideration until
now and so with that understanding
sort of what do you do right i mean so
how do you build a product that that
actually helps
you know make that better and to enable
that communication
yeah for us the products evolved because
we started our first deal room back in
2012 and started as yearly diligence
management
selling investment banks the sell side
we realized the hard way it wasn't our
early adopters they're not the ones
super motivated to
innovate their style and approach to be
more efficient so we shifted to
corporate where we got our traction then
we added the capabilities for
integration management then pipeline
management evolved the product into a
full
m a life cycle management platform
uh and that's that's what we provide
today to corporations is our flagship
solution is a portal that allows you to
run a deal end to end create that
continuity enable the collaboration
and have that nature or management of
multi-party built into it so you want to
enable a collaboration with your
internal teams enable the collaboration
with your external teams and the
counterparty all in one environment
the industry's had these project
management tools they've had these
virtual data rooms and what we did was
brought the two together very nicely
into a single product that actually
works well
and that that's sort of our
core tech stack that we provide
now it's flexible it adjusts based on
clients needs and their
ecosystem the compliance requirements
and so forth
our education side
we published a series of books and
frameworks around the best practices
because even just telling you about hey
getting aligned around the front end
stuff the vision and things like that it
starts prompting you to think about how
you're going to integrate the companies
really early
and when you do that you want to keep
making that an iterative process so as
you go through diligence
you continuously iterate on your
integration plan a lot of companies
don't do this they wait till
about far beyond because they think they
want to have this full certainty about
the deal closing
and then they start bringing people in
to plan integration which
it becomes tough to do that you want to
do it as a very so that that's when you
start thinking about best practices you
identify those approaches but they go
hand-in-hand it's not that you throw a
technology in there it's going to solve
all your problems
i think other thing we noticed too is if
organizations
start evaluating their approach
they start getting change oriented
when they're willing to
open up their mind and look at hey
here's some ideas of things we could do
different better
and let's try that out and see if it
works and then decide what we want to
keep what we want to try something
different and modify and go from there
when companies are doing that
they little by little they start
becoming change oriented
then it becomes easier and it makes more
sense to throw the technology in because
people their teams understand why
we're implementing this tech to
standardize this to you solve this
problem
when you do it that backwards and we get
this a lot a lot people reach out like
we want to put this tool in to solve our
problems like the tool is not going to
solve your problems i think you very
very clarifying and communicating across
your team so everybody agrees with that
problem is is probably a better way to
start solving the problem is to clarify
what the problem is
you know i always do the exercise of the
discovery calls talk to the key
stakeholders what are your biggest
problems can we rank them and then can
we go meet as a team
and let's not worry about who said what
but let's prioritize this list of
problems we're able to curate from
everybody and then and then prioritize
it just so we all agree what's number
one problem number two number three
and then let's let's start looking at
solutions based on how well it's gonna
solve the problem and be open about it
right because
maybe it's not technology maybe it's
just changing our practice let's start
we have some falloffs on uh
cross-functional dependencies we could
create some
stand-up meetings
that with those cross-functional teams
to solve that right it could be just a
practice thing
uh or you might come across something
that maybe is more of a technology thing
that
information handoff between diligence
integration well if we're using the same
product between the two we'd have better
information handoff
now how much is this a human
human in the loop versus automatic
you know a product what is sort of that
well what is how do you how do you see
the balance between these two worlds
it depends on the problem to solve i
think a lot of times it's practice first
i would look at the practice first and
then the tool tends to be what's there
to help you
standardize the practice
okay and so in that in that way
how much focus are you putting on
you know as a technology
versus
versus you know people
it depends where they're coming from i
think that's a big thing for us to
understand because we have a lot our
business our we have a phenomenal
marketing team so they create a lot of
inbound interest so we're very fortunate
but then those are the ones that are all
over the place you know when you go
outbound to a company
you're running the discovery process
they may be aware about some of those
challenges but you're really helping
them to think it through
and understand what's the impact of
those challenges and starting to build a
formal business case on how our solution
would be able to help solve it
and that's early on when we think about
even the marketing they're introducing
best practices early a lot of our
content our podcast we're interviewing
practitioners trying to learn from their
what are their lessons learned can we
write up an ebook about some of the best
practices we learned from interviewing
three m a lawyers
and then we would like to share that
information so a lot of times the
inbound they've already read some of our
books they've listened to a number of
our podcasts they've adopted some of
these best practices they've developed a
level of trust and then they start
reaching out with interest in the
product solutions
and then it gets a lot easier to to have
that conversation very focused on the
product whereas
excuse me if you're reaching out cold
you got to start it over from the
beginning where you want to introduce
those best practices where you see fit
are we discovering new
you know new innovative ways to
to do these deals or the life cycle of
these deals or do you feel like we're
sort of converging on the best practices
and
and this is how you know society works
this is how business works or i mean how
much does this tend to evolve and change
over time
i think there is a big change in that
the drivers of doing m a are shifting
the old school way was you're doing
things for
the financial mechanisms
you know you're arbitraging valuations
by doing roll-ups
you're you're really focused on market
share as your means for acquisition
if we look at any of the tech companies
the majority of their acquisitions are
on capabilities
uh that um
you know crowdstrike bought humeo and it
was a play because it made no sense in
valuation and why they paid half a
million billion dollars for that company
but if you looked at how unique their
technology was and how much it would
enhance the capability
of crowdstrike
it was well worth spending the the half
a billion dollars
so that's we're seeing more of that
where when you're buying companies
because the capability
and that's it's very different right
because you when you buy a company for
market share you can be
pretty uh
like take more of a static uh approach
to how you integrate the company sort of
hey we're gonna especially like the
assets right you're buying factories
things like that you just you buy it
here's a plan we'll go integrate move on
but when it's something like
capabilities
it's really different you're trying to
take
what this little startup has done and
the way they do things
and disrupt your own business
right you're trying to transform your
own company so if you look at
what can we do with the company after we
buy it we can number one do nothing
companies do do that they'll buy the
company they don't do anything they kind
of
cheer the management team on and let
them do their thing
we could do a partial integration we
sort of integrate some key functions
our accounting hr back-end stuff called
a day
we could do a full integration
we fully integrate the company right
into ours
uh then we have this transformative
integration
where we're trying to make more changes
in our organization to be able to get
the value and transform our our business
uh
you know that's unique that's that's
where
a lot of the stuff will be done the
research around agile the case studies
of google atlassian published a book
called agile m a it's geared towards
that it's how do we think through about
transformative deals where you're buying
a business to disrupt your own business
and completely morph and change it
that's a big shift in the business that
requires a totally different way of
thinking about it because you have to be
dynamic you have to
as you go through it's not so much oh
yeah yeah you guys have to change to
salesforce you got to stop using uh
slack and go use you know our team it's
like no
we wanna we need to learn from you we
need to we need to say hey you know
maybe maybe this new crm that we've
never heard of uh is is better than what
we're using sure right and that's it's
really difficult
to get a team that's responsible to
integrate this company to think of it
the other way around
of like how do i change our processes
and learn from this company and be able
to change so we can adopt our ways to to
become better
um that that's what's the big big
difference right now and i would say as
a whole why this industry is changing
significantly
fascinating yeah it's
i think that one one thing that i
that that perhaps is leaving me here um
i think it's sort of this understanding
about the the complicated nature of
these of these deals and how dynamic
they are and how attentive you have to
be to the decision makers and and and
give respect to each part of the process
it sounds like a lot of the mishaps we
were talking about before they were
emerging from miscommunication
misalignments
lack of integration lack of
consolidation or understanding that it's
a people first mentality and that's
exactly what what what your work what
you're here to do and and i really want
to thank you for coming in and sharing
those you know those insights with me
and it sounds like you you have you have
quite a bit of experience in the field
and and a quite a bit of journey behind
you already and that uh
you've seen a lot and you've done a lot
so it's it it says a lot
thank you very much
we got a lot we got a long ways to go
michael i gotta disrupt and change this
whole industry we've got a long ways to
go
kson thank you very very much and
continue making great deals
thank you michael my pleasure thank you
you